Added 4.1 release notes (#13726)
openshift/openshift-docs: release_notes/ocp-4-1-release-notes.adoc

cloud application platform for deploying both new and existing applications on
secure, scalable resources with minimal configuration and management overhead.
{product-title} supports a wide selection of programming languages and
frameworks, such as Java, JavaScript, Python, Ruby, and PHP.

Built on Red Hat Enterprise Linux and Kubernetes, {product-title}
provides a more secure and scalable multi-tenant operating system for today’s
enterprise-class applications, while delivering integrated application runtimes
and libraries. {product-title} enables organizations to meet security, privacy,
compliance, and governance requirements.

[[ocp-4-1-about-this-release]]
== About this release

Red Hat {product-title}
(link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2019:0758[RHBA-2019:0758]) is now
available. This release is based on OKD 4.1, and it uses Kubernetes 1.13. New
features, changes, and known issues that pertain to {product-title}
{product-version} are included in this topic.

Red Hat did not publicly release {product-title} 4.0 and, instead, is releasing
{product-title} {product-version} directly after version 3.11.

> {product-title} {product-version} is supported on Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 and

Reviewer: Only RHEL 7.6 is supported, and it's really important that you can only use RHEL for worker machines.

I might flip the order of this paragraph and the following one.

proxy server for {product-title}.

[[ocp-4-1-release-acknowledgements]]
=== Acknowledgments

Red Hat Global Support Services would like to recognize Rushil Sharma, JooHo
Lee, and Suresh Gaikwad for their outstanding contributions in evaluating and
testing {product-title} 4.1.

[[ocp-41-deprecated-features]]
=== Deprecated features

Large changes to the underlying architecture and installation process are
applied in {product-title} 4.1, and many features from {product-title} 3.x are
now deprecated.

.Features Deprecated in Version 4.1
[cols="2",options="header"]
|====
|Feature |Justification

|Hawkular
|Replaced by cluster monitoring.

|Cassandra
|Replaced by cluster monitoring.

|Heapster
|Replaced by Prometheus adapter.

|Atomic Host
|Replaced by Red Hat CoreOS.

|System containers
|Replaced by Red Hat CoreOS.

|projectatomic/docker-1.13 additional search registries
|CRI-O is the default container runtime for 4.x on RHCOS and Red Hat Enterprise Linux.

|`oc adm diagnostics`
|Operator-based diagnostics.

|`oc adm registry`
|Replaced by the registry operator.

|Custom strategy builds using Docker
|If you want to continue using custom builds, you should replace your Docker

> invocations with Podman and Buildah. The custom build strategy will not be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
invocations with Podman or Buildah. The custom build strategy will not be
```

`podman build` is a drop-in replacement for `docker build`. You can use a Dockerfile with buildah via `buildah bud ...`, but buildah lets you do a whole lot more.
/cc @rhatdan

[[ocp-4-1-web-console]]
=== Web console

[[ocp-4-1-developer-catalog]]
==== Developer Catalog

{product-title} 4.1 features a redesigned Developer Catalog that brings all of
the new Operators and existing broker services together, with new ways to
discover, sort, and understand how to best use each type of offering. The
Developer Catalog is the entry point for a developer to access all services
available to them. It merges all capabilities from Operators, the Service
Catalog, brokers, and Source-to-Image (S2I).

[[ocp-4-1-new-management-screens]]
==== New management screens

New management screens in {product-title} 4.1 support automated operations.
Examples include the management of machine sets and machines, taints,
tolerations, and cluster settings.

[[ocp-4-1-security]]
=== Security

In {product-title} 4.1, an Operator is utilized to install, configure, and manage
the certificate signing server. Certificates are managed as secrets, and are
stored and encrypted in etcd.

[[ocp-4-1-notable-technical-changes]]
== Notable technical changes

{product-title} 4.1 introduces the following notable technical changes.

[discrete]
[[ocp-4-1-buildah]]

> ==== All image builds are performed by buildah

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
==== Builds powered by buildah
```

> All image builds are now performed by buildah instead of the docker daemon.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Source and Docker strategy builds are now performed by buildah instead of the docker daemon.
```
For custom strategy customers are on their own (per note above)

[id='ocp-4-1-release-notes']
= {product-title} 4.1 release notes
include::modules/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: release-notes

toc::[]

Red Hat {product-title} provides developers and IT organizations with a hybrid
cloud application platform for deploying both new and existing applications on
secure, scalable resources with minimal configuration and management overhead.
{product-title} supports a wide selection of programming languages and
frameworks, such as Java, JavaScript, Python, Ruby, and PHP.

Built on Red Hat Enterprise Linux and Kubernetes, {product-title}
provides a more secure and scalable multi-tenant operating system for today’s
enterprise-class applications, while delivering integrated application runtimes
and libraries. {product-title} enables organizations to meet security, privacy,
compliance, and governance requirements.

[[ocp-4-1-about-this-release]]
== About this release

Red Hat {product-title}
(link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2019:0758[RHBA-2019:0758]) is now

> available. This release is based on OKD 4.1, and it uses Kubernetes 1.13. New

Reviewer 3: @smarterclayton We released OKD 4.1 ?

Author: I'm removing the reference just in case

{product-title} {product-version} directly after version 3.11.

{product-title} {product-version} clusters are available at
https://cloud.openshift.com. The Unified Hybrid Cloud (UHC) application for
{product-title} allows you to deploy OpenShift clusters to either on-premise or
cloud environments.

{product-title} {product-version} is supported on Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7.6 and
later, as well as Red Hat Enterprise Linux CoreOS 4.1.

You must use {op-system-first} for the control plane, or master, machines and
can use either {op-system} or Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7.6 for compute, or worker,
machines.

[IMPORTANT]
====
Because only Red Hat Enterprise Linux version 7.6 is supported for compute
machines, you must not upgrade the Red Hat Enterprise Linux compute machines to
version 8.
====

You can install {product-title} {product-version} with installer-provisioned
infrastructure on Amazon Web Services (AWS) or user-provided infrastructure on
AWS, bare metal, or vSphere hosts. If you use the installer-provisioned
infrastructure installation, the cluster provisions and manages all of the
cluster infrastructure for you.

> 

Reviewer: Apparently you can't use a proxy. The need to have direct internet access for machines might be a problem for customers. I think we should include this limitation in the release notes somewhere. It doesn't have to be the same, but this is the note that I'm adding [elsewhere](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/14722):

```
[IMPORTANT]
====
{product-title} requires all machines, including the computer that you run the
installation process on, to have direct internet access to pull images
for platform containers and provide telemetry data to Red Hat.
You cannot specify a proxy server for {product-title}.
====
```

provide any app metrics for the custom metrics API.

Limitations:

* The adapter only connects to a single Prometheus instance (or a set of
load-balanced replicas, using Kubernetes services).
* Manually deploying adapter and configuring it to use Prometheus.
* Syntax for the Prometheus Adapter configuration could change in the future.
* The `APIService` configuration to wire Kubernetes' API aggregation to the
instance of the custom metrics adapter will be overwritten in future releases,
if {product-title} ships an out-of-the-box custom metrics adapter.

[[ocp-4-1-cluster-monitoring-alerting-UI]]
==== New alerting user interface

An alerting UI is now natively integrated into the {product-title} web console.
You can now view cluster-level alerts and alerting rules from a single place, as
well as configure silences.

[[ocp-4-1-cluster-monitoring-telemeter]]
==== Telemeter

Telemeter collects anonymized cluster-related metrics to proactively help
customers with their {product-title} clusters. This helps:

* Gather crucial health metrics of {product-title} installations.
* Enable a viable feedback loop of {product-title} upgrades.

> * Enable metering.

Reviewer 4: Metering and telemeter aren't related.

cluster` commands, Minishift, and CDK. {product-title} 4.1 focuses on ease of
access and native experience, with a native installer on macOS and Microsoft
Windows, native hypervisor support, and tray icon integration.

[[ocp-4-1-registry]]
=== Registry

[[ocp-4-1-registry-managed-by-operator]]
==== The registry is now managed by an Operator

The registry is now managed by an Operator instead of `oc adm registry`.

[[ocp-4-1-networking]]
=== Networking

[[ocp-4-1-cno]]
==== Cluster Network Operator (CNO)

The cluster network is now configured and managed by an Operator. The Operator
upgrades and monitors the cluster network.

[[ocp-4-1-openshift-sdn]]
==== OpenShift SDN

The default mode is now `NetworkPolicy`.

[[ocp-4-1-multus]]
==== Multus

Multus is a meta plug-in for Kubernetes Container Network Interface (CNI), which
enables a user to create multiple network interfaces per pod.

[[ocp-4-1-web-console]]
=== Web console

[[ocp-4-1-developer-catalog]]
==== Developer Catalog

{product-title} 4.1 features a redesigned Developer Catalog that brings all of
the new Operators and existing broker services together, with new ways to

> discover, sort ,and understand how to best use each type of offering. The

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
discover, sort, and understand how to best use each type of offering. The
```

Developer Catalog is the entry point for a developer to access all services
available to them. It merges all capabilities from Operators, the Service
Catalog, brokers, and Source-to-Image (S2I).

[[ocp-4-1-operator-powered-UI-extensions]]
==== Operator-powered user interface extensions

Now with Operators, you can pick and choose what functionality you want to

> enable, allowing the user to customize the interface.

Reviewer 5: Hi, @ahardin-rh. It's not clear to me what this means. Is this enabling features through operators or actual UI customizations? We plan to let admins create custom resources to customize the UI, but that won't be until at least 4.2.

Author: This was gathered from an early 4.x roadmap presentation, so I will drop this section.

[[ocp-4-1-new-management-screens]]
==== New management screens

> New management screens in {product-title} 4.1  support automated operations.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
New management screens in {product-title} 4.1 support automated operations.
```

> Examples include the management of taints, tolerations, and cluster settings.

Reviewer 5: I'd suggest mentioning machine sets and machines.

that describe Technology Preview features, will ship enabled. You can change the
default feature gates, but doing so prevents you from upgrading your cluster.
Any change to a feature gate stops an upgrade. Clusters with a changed feature
gate must be re-installed to apply even an asynchronous release update.

In the table below, features marked *TP* indicate _Technology Preview_ and
features marked *GA* indicate _General Availability_.

If a feature is marked *yes;on*, that feature is controlled by a feature gate
that is enabled, or turned on, when shipped. If a feature is marked *yes;off*,
that feature is controlled by a feature gate that is disabled, or turned off,
when shipped.

.Technology Preview Tracker
[cols="4",options="header"]
|====
|Feature |Feature gate |OCP 3.11 |OCP 4.1

|Prometheus Cluster Monitoring
|
|GA
|GA

|Local Storage Persistent Volumes
|
|TP
|TP

|CRI-O for runtime pods
|
|GA* footnoteref:[disclaimer, Features marked with `*` indicate delivery in a z-stream patch.]
|GA

|Tenant Driven Snapshotting
|
|TP
|TP

|`oc` CLI Plug-ins
|
|TP
|TP

|Service Catalog
|
|GA
|GA

|Template Service Broker
|
|GA
|GA

> |OpenShift Automation Broker

Reviewer 6: @ahardin-rh In 4.1, the confirmed name should be `OpenShift Ansible Service Broker`.

Author: @jianzhangbjz Thanks for your feedback! I opened https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/14941 to address your comments

available. This release is based on OKD 4.1, and it uses Kubernetes 1.13. New
features, changes, and known issues that pertain to {product-title}
{product-version} are included in this topic.

Red Hat did not publicly release {product-title} 4.0 and, instead, is releasing
{product-title} {product-version} directly after version 3.11.

{product-title} {product-version} clusters are available at
https://cloud.openshift.com. The Unified Hybrid Cloud (UHC) application for
{product-title} allows you to deploy OpenShift clusters to either on-premise or
cloud environments.

{product-title} {product-version} is supported on Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7.6 and
later, as well as Red Hat CoreOS 8.

You must use {op-system-first} for the control plane, or master, machines and
can use either {op-system} or Red Hat Enterprise 7.6 for compute, or worker,
machines.

[IMPORTANT]
====
Because only Red Hat Enterprise Linux version 7.6 is supported for compute
machines, you must not upgrade the Red Hat Enterprise Linux compute machines to
version 8.
====

You can install {product-title} {product-version} with installer-provisioned

> infrastructure (IPI) on Amazon Web Services (AWS) or user-provided

Author: I need to drop the abbreviation IPI per https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1706179

Lee, and Suresh Gaikwad for their outstanding contributions in evaluating and
testing {product-title} 4.1.

[[ocp-41-deprecated-features]]
=== Deprecated features

Large changes to the underlying architecture and installation process are
applied in {product-title} {product-version}, and many features from
{product-title} 3.x are now deprecated.

.Features Deprecated in Version 4.1
[cols="2",options="header"]
|====
|Feature |Justification

|Hawkular
|Replaced by cluster monitoring.

|Cassandra
|Replaced by cluster monitoring.

|Heapster
|Replaced by Prometheus adapter.

|Atomic Host
|Replaced by Red Hat CoreOS.

|System containers
|Replaced by Red Hat CoreOS.

|projectatomic/docker-1.13 additional search registries
|CRI-O is the default container runtime for 4.x on RHCOS and Red Hat Enterprise Linux.

|`oc adm diagnostics`
|Operator-based diagnostics.

|`oc adm registry`
|Replaced by the registry operator.

|Custom strategy builds using Docker
|If you want to continue using custom builds, you should replace your Docker
invocations with Podman and Buildah. The custom build strategy will not be
removed, but the functionality changed significantly in {product-title} 4.1.

|Cockpit

> |Replaced by Quay.

Reviewer 7: Quay doesn't replace Cockpit.  Not sure we have a direct replacement.   The closest thing would be the improved OCP 4.1 Console.   @spadgett @jwforres Opinion?

Built on Red Hat Enterprise Linux and Kubernetes, {product-title}
provides a more secure and scalable multi-tenant operating system for today’s
enterprise-class applications, while delivering integrated application runtimes
and libraries. {product-title} enables organizations to meet security, privacy,
compliance, and governance requirements.

[[ocp-4-1-about-this-release]]
== About this release

Red Hat {product-title}
(link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2019:0758[RHBA-2019:0758]) is now
available. This release is based on OKD 4.1, and it uses Kubernetes 1.13. New
features, changes, and known issues that pertain to {product-title}
{product-version} are included in this topic.

Red Hat did not publicly release {product-title} 4.0 and, instead, is releasing
{product-title} {product-version} directly after version 3.11.

{product-title} {product-version} clusters are available at
https://cloud.openshift.com. The Unified Hybrid Cloud (UHC) application for
{product-title} allows you to deploy OpenShift clusters to either on-premise or
cloud environments.

{product-title} {product-version} is supported on Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7.6 and

> later, as well as Red Hat CoreOS 8.

Reviewer 3: "Red Hat CoreOS 8" should be "Red Hat Enterprise Linux CoreOS 4.1"

You must use {op-system-first} for the control plane, or master, machines and

> can use either {op-system} or Red Hat Enterprise 7.6 for compute, or worker,

Reviewer 3: "Red Hat Enterprise 7.6" should be "Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7.6"

machines.

[IMPORTANT]
====
Because only Red Hat Enterprise Linux version 7.6 is supported for compute
machines, you must not upgrade the Red Hat Enterprise Linux compute machines to
version 8.
====

You can install {product-title} {product-version} with installer-provisioned

> infrastructure on Amazon Web Services (AWS) or user-provided infrastructure on

Reviewer 3: Follow up with https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1706179

AWS, bare metal, or vSphere hosts. If you use the installer-provisioned
infrastructure installation, the cluster provisions and manages all of the
cluster infrastructure for you.

[[ocp-4-1-release-acknowledgements]]
=== Acknowledgments

Red Hat Global Support Services would like to recognize Rushil Sharma, JooHo
Lee, and Suresh Gaikwad for their outstanding contributions in evaluating and
testing {product-title} 4.1.

[[ocp-41-deprecated-features]]
=== Deprecated features

Large changes to the underlying architecture and installation process are
applied in {product-title} {product-version}, and many features from
{product-title} 3.x are now deprecated.

.Features Deprecated in Version 4.1
[cols="2",options="header"]
|====
|Feature |Justification

|Hawkular
|Replaced by cluster monitoring.

|Cassandra
|Replaced by cluster monitoring.

|Heapster
|Replaced by Prometheus adapter.

|Atomic Host

> |Replaced by Red Hat CoreOS.

Reviewer 3: "Red Hat Enterprise Linux CoreOS"

|System containers
|Replaced by Red Hat CoreOS.

|projectatomic/docker-1.13 additional search registries
|CRI-O is the default container runtime for 4.x on RHCOS and Red Hat Enterprise Linux.

|`oc adm diagnostics`
|Operator-based diagnostics.

|`oc adm registry`
|Replaced by the registry operator.

> |Custom Docker Build Strategy on Builder Pods

Reviewer 8: should be "Custom Strategy Builds using Docker"
/cc @adambkaplan

piece of software. They act like an extension of the software vendor’s
engineering team, watching over a Kubernetes environment (such as
{product-title}) and using its current state to make decisions in real time.
Advanced Operators are designed to handle upgrades seamlessly, react to failures
automatically, and not take shortcuts, like skipping a software backup process
to save time.

[[ocp-4-1-operator-lifecycle-manager]]
==== Operator Lifecycle Manager (OLM)

This feature is now fully supported in {product-title} 4.1.

The OLM aids cluster administrators in installing, upgrading, and granting
access to Operators running on their cluster:

* Includes a catalog of curated Operators, with the ability to load other Operators into the cluster
* Handles rolling updates of all Operators to new versions
* Supports role-based access control (RBAC) for certain teams to use certain Operators

See
xref:../applications/operators/olm-adding-operators-to-cluster.adoc#olm-adding-operators-to-a-cluster[Adding
Operators to a cluster] for more information.

[[ocp-4-1-installation-and-upgrade]]
=== Installation and upgrade

> Red Hat {product-title} 4.1 has an Installer Provisioned Infrastructure (IPI),

Reviewer 3: Follow up https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1706179

more information.

[[ocp-4-1-operator-hub]]
==== OperatorHub

OperatorHub is available to administrators and helps with easy discovery and
installation of all optional components and applications. It includes offerings
from Red Hat products, Red Hat partners, and the community.

.Features provided with base installation and OperatorHub
[cols="3",options="header"]
|====
|Feature |New installer |OperatorHub

|Console and authentication
|* [x]
| -

|Prometheus cluster monitoring
|* [x]
| -

|Over-the-air updates
|* [x]
| -

|Machine management
|* [x]
| -

|Optional service brokers
| -
|* [x]

|Optional {product-title} components
| -
|* [x]

|Red Hat product Operators
| -
|* [x]

|Red Hat partner Operators
| -
|* [x]

|Community Operators
| -
|* [x]

|====

[[ocp-4-1-storage]]
=== Storage

Storage support in {product-title} 4.1 is the same as {product-title} 3.11 with
the exception of the following available in Technology Preview: EFS (CSI Driver
handled via Amazon), Manilla provisioner/operator, and Snapshot.

[[ocp-4-1-CSI]]
==== Container Storage Interface

In {product-title} 4.1, Container Storage Interface (CSI) is now generally

> available.

Reviewer 3: @jsafrane  Is it true ?

Reviewer 3: @gnufied Could you take a look ?

Reviewer 9: CSI is not yet generally available with Openshift 4.1, because we aren't yet shipping standard sidecar containers. CSI is enabled and more like - DYI config but isn't GAed yet. cc @childsb @jsafrane

Reviewer 10: Yes, CSI is **NOT** GA in 4.1

Author: Thank you for confirming. I am removing this.

Limit Calculator] to estimate cluster limits for your environment.

[[ocp-4-1-node-tuning-operator]]
==== Node Tuning Operator

The
xref:../scalability_and_performance/using-node-tuning-operator.adoc#using-node-tuning-operator[Node
Tuning Operator] is now part of a standard {product-title} installation in
version 4.1 and later.

The Node Tuning Operator helps you manage node-level tuning by orchestrating the
tuned daemon. The majority of high-performance applications require some level
of kernel tuning. The Node Tuning Operator provides a unified management
interface to users of node-level sysctls and more flexibility to add custom
tuning, which is currently a Technology Preview feature, specified by user
needs. The Operator manages the containerized tuned daemon for OpenShift
Container Platform as a Kubernetes DaemonSet. It ensures the custom tuning
specification is passed to all containerized tuned daemons running in the
cluster in the format that the daemons understand. The daemons run on all nodes
in the cluster, one per node.

[[ocp-4-1-metering]]
=== Metering

[[ocp-4-1-autoscale-pods-horizontally-based-on-custom-metrics-api]]

> ==== Autoscale pods horizontally based on the custom metrics API (Technology Preview)

Reviewer 8: why is this under "Metering"?
/cc @chancez

Reviewer 4: Because _everyone_ confuses metering and monitoring. This is more related to monitoring or workloads.

enable, allowing the user to customize the interface.

[[ocp-4-1-new-management-screens]]
==== New management screens

New management screens in {product-title} 4.1  support automated operations.
Examples include the management of taints, tolerations, and cluster settings.

[[ocp-4-1-security]]
=== Security

In {product-title} 4.1, an Operator is utilized to install, configure, and manage
the certificate signing server. Certificates are managed as secrets, and are
stored and encrypted in etcd.

[[ocp-4-1-notable-technical-changes]]
== Notable technical changes

{product-title} 4.1 introduces the following notable technical changes.

[discrete]
[[ocp-4-1-buildah]]
==== All image builds are performed by buildah

All image builds are now performed by buildah instead of the docker daemon.

[discrete]
[[ocp-4-1-SecurityContextConstraints]]
==== SecurityContextConstraints

`SecurityContextConstraints` now only exist in the `security.openshift.io` group.

[discrete]
[[ocp-4-1-Service-CA-bundle]]
==== Service CA bundle changes

Pods can trust cluster-created certificates, which are only signed for internal
DNS names, by using a CA bundle that is automatically injected into any

> configMap annotated with `service.alpha.openshift.io/inject-cabundle=true`. The

Reviewer 8: @enj this is beta not alpha right?

also should probably note that this annotation results in wiping out existing content in the configmap.

CA bundle will be made available as PEM-encoded data under the
key `service-ca.crt`.

Pods that currently consume the service-serving CA bundle from
`/var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/service-ca.crt` should migrate to
obtaining the CA bundle from a configMap annotated with

> `service.alpha.openshift.io/inject-cabundle=true`.

Reviewer 8: again should be beta i believe.

Some features in this release are currently in Technology Preview. These
experimental features are not intended for production use. Please note the
following scope of support on the Red Hat Customer Portal for these features:

link:https://access.redhat.com/support/offerings/techpreview[Technology Preview
Features Support Scope]

Starting in {product-title} 4.1, some _feature gates_, a set of key=value pairs
that describe Technology Preview features, will ship enabled. You can change the
default feature gates, but doing so prevents you from upgrading your cluster.
Any change to a feature gate stops an upgrade. Clusters with a changed feature
gate must be re-installed to apply even an asynchronous release update.

In the table below, features marked *TP* indicate _Technology Preview_ and
features marked *GA* indicate _General Availability_.

If a feature is marked *yes;on*, that feature is controlled by a feature gate
that is enabled, or turned on, when shipped. If a feature is marked *yes;off*,
that feature is controlled by a feature gate that is disabled, or turned off,
when shipped.

.Technology Preview Tracker
[cols="4",options="header"]
|====

> |Feature |Feature gate |OCP 3.11 |OCP 4.1

Reviewer 3: The "Feature gate" column is empty.

Author: @liangxia Yes, to my knowledge, nothing officially has a feature gate yet, but that can change in a future async release. 

@joanne-okerman Is this still the case? I used the Tech Preview tracker spreadsheet as my source of truth for this information.
